# Randall Degges

## This is an archived post This is an archived post

[Previous][]   [Index][]   [Next][]

### Absolute Victory

July 17 2011, 12:44 AM  by Randall Degges

![][]

I've recently started reading biographies of famous historical figures, and came
across some very interesting stuff while reading [Ghengis Khan and the Making of
the Modern World][], a biography of the life of [Ghengis Khan][].

While Ghengis Khan had many traits worth writing about, one in particular caught
my attention: **absolute victory**. When Ghengis Khan entered conflicts, he did
so with 100% of his energy and effort. To him, every challenge required
life-or-death dedication, and the complete destruction of his enemies. During
times of war, after the [Mongols][] had conquered a city, they would then:

-   Round up and kill all of the rich people living there.
-   Loot the city.
-   Leave the city, allowing the citizens of the city to manage it as they
    pleased.
-   Marry one of the new city officials into Ghengis Khan's family.

During Ghengis Khan's time period, this was unheard of. Instead of simply
looting the city and moving on, Ghengis Khan went to extrodinary measures to
completely desolate the city's political structure by killing all members of
high-society, thereby removing the main long-term threat of revenge and future
political problems. Furthermore, by allowing the local populations to control
their own cities as normal, and by marrying one of their officials into his
family--Ghengis Khan adopted these cities as his own family. This helped unify
cities under his overall rule, and lead to a sense of security and loyalty for
the people living in these regions. Even though they were not Mongols by
culture, they had become Mongols by family ties, and through their great
treatment, allies of Ghengis Khan.

This led me to think of how *absolute victory* is perceived in today's society.
In modern society (at least in Western culture), *absolute victory* is heavily
frowned upon. It is often said that one should do "one's best", and that
relentlessly pursuing victory is selfish. I belive this view stems from Western
mannerisms. It is considered impolite to publicly display your lust for victory.
By wanting to achieve victory, it is often implied that you want others to lose,
which makes people feel uncomfortable.

I like the idea of *absolute victory*. It inspires passion, drive, and desire.
The idea of simply "doing your best" may sound noble, but often doesn't live up
to its expectations. When you simply shoot for "your best" in anything you do,
you subconsciously lower the bar for "your best". By missing the critical
component of competition and life-or-death dedication you remove an enormous
amount of pressure from yourself to acheive at a much higher level.

Imagine how much more you could achieve by mentally staking all or nothing on
victory. Instead of working on that new startup you've been thinking of, commit
to it life-or-death. Make it into the best possible company you can, and push it
to a level that leaves no room for competition of any sort. Completely dominate
your competitors in every way, and leave only ashes in your wake. It may sound
extreme, but focusing on *absolute victory* will help drive you to do your best
work.

Try harnessing that fire inside of you, and practice *absolute victory* on a
project sometime this week. Be merciless with your execution. Let me know how it
goes, I'm very interested to see what results you have.

 

#### Tags

personaldevelopment, philosophy

#### 1726 views and 1 response

-   Jul 17 2011, 4:11 AM

    jasonkotenko (Twitter) responded:

    I followed something like this in college. I found this comic to best
    describe the way I approached college: [http://abstrusegoose.com/43][]

    The negatives are that people tend to really get to hate you. When they
    would see that I was in their upper level math classes, they would literally
    swear under their breath. But I didn't do anything to hurt them, and I think
    that's where it's important to draw the line for me. In fact I used to
    publicly study the last 3 hours before every test I took - in the lab I
    would write up every theorem and many example problems over and over again,
    helping anyone who asked. What people didn't realize was that I didn't have
    them all memorized because I was a genius, it was because I studied for 40
    hours before that moment.

    In business, I think sometimes you have to even try to destroy others in
    order to win yourself. I think that as long as you do it in a way that is
    not personal, it's not an issue. For instance out marketing a competitor.
    What's not acceptable to my moral standard is beating others in an
    underhanded way.

  [Previous]: ../../../posts/2011/07/building-a-geek-haven-in-los-angeles.html
  [Index]: ../../../index-4.html
  [Next]: ../../../posts/2011/07/the-root-of-all-change.html
  []: ../../../image/2012/04/40483792-barbarian.jpg
  [Ghengis Khan and the Making of the Modern World]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0609809644/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=projectb14ck-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399369&creativeASIN=0609809644
    "Ghengis Khan and the Making of the Modern World"
  [Ghengis Khan]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ghengis_Khan "Ghengis Khan"
  [Mongols]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mongols "Mongols"
  [http://abstrusegoose.com/43]: http://abstrusegoose.com/43
