# Randall Degges

## This is an archived post This is an archived post

[Previous][]   [Index][]   [Next][]

### Don't Get Too Cocky

March 6 2011, 3:19 PM  by Randall Degges

I learned an important lesson a few months ago, and thought I'd share. Don't get
too cocky.

For the longest time I considered myself a good programmer. In university, I
would wait till the last minute to finish my computer science projects as I
already knew how to do them, and when working on other projects I'd generally
spend 99% of my time researching new things, and only 1% of my time actually
doing them. I got cocky.

In my head, I was able to justify my actions: "I already know this stuff. No
reason why I should bother starting early because it's a piece of cake." I
remember sitting in the lab at 2am in the morning the day before my project was
due hacking away--thinking of all the other "normal" people in my class who were
working on the project the entire week. "What fools!" I thought.

Unforutnately, while being cocky is sometimes a positive force, more often then
not it blows up in your face. I realized this several months ago when trying to
design a simple web page for work. I've never been a real designer. I've always
considered myself a strictly "back-end" developer. Most of my work and fun comes
from coding the low-level components. Years ago, when I first started working on
web-type stuff, I dismissed HTML and CSS as beginner's toys: "They aren't real
programming languages. They're only for displaying data. Any monkey can make a
template." When I began working on my template for work, I realized how wrong I
was.

It's easy to criticize and dismiss things that look "easy" without ever really
working on them to accomplish something. In my case, trying to build this simple
template for work turned out to be one of the most frustrating experiences in my
life. I spent far over 100 hours writing a template for the site, and it was one
of the ugliest things imaginable. What made it worse, of course, is that I knew
what I wanted it to look like, but because of my lack of care for the
technology, I couldn't build what I wanted.

Lesson learned.

This month I'm actually going back and starting fresh again with HTML and CSS. I
decided to take them seriously this time around, and really learn it properly.
My goal is to eventually re-write the work template I failed at a few months
ago, and become good enough to build designs for myself, and not rely on outside
help.

I think that being humble is a great quality to have. While being cocky can
sometimes give you the confidence to do something, being humble gives you the
mindset to continue doing things, and get progressively better at them over
time.

Regardless of how awesome you are, don't let it get to your head.

#### Tags

personaldevelopment, philosophy

#### 43382 views and 1 response

-   Mar 7 2011, 12:31 AM

    switchology (Twitter) responded:

    University education in computer science is a joke.

    Can I point out that good web design is an art and uses many of the same
    qualities an artist exhibits. Being a good and justifiably cocky-worthy
    developer does not mean you're a good artist.

    There is a technical element to assembly the design but that's similar to
    understanding how a paintbrush works. You can perform all the techniques
    with a brush, but fail to produce anything pleasing. Likewise you can write
    HTML/CSS until your eyes fall out but it doesn't make you a capable
    designer.

  [Previous]: ../../../posts/2011/03/my-new-office.html
  [Index]: ../../../index-5.html
  [Next]: ../../../posts/2011/02/my-environment.html
