# Randall Degges

## This is an archived post This is an archived post

[Previous][]   [Index][]   [Next][]

### Productivity and Calmness

February 9 2013, 11:38 PM  by Randall Degges

![][]

While there are certainly many productivity hacks available to you, I can think
of none greater than calming yourself.

I can't tell you how frequently I find myself completely overwhelmed with things
to do, schedules to meet, and customers to keep happy. Each time I find myself
in this situation I always try to take a step back and reflect on the
circumstances. More often than not, when I consciously analyze my situation, I
realize that I'm overreacting to pressures.

I'm worrying too much, pushing too hard, and not spending enough time reflecting
on what it is I'm doing as a whole.

The solution to all this, of course, is to take a step back, take a deep breath,
and relax. And I don't mean *relax* as in "Just *relax*, man!". I mean relax as
in *literally relax*.

Close your laptop, turn off your phone, and spend 15 minutes in a quiet room by
yourself. If you don't have this luxury, I'd recommend putting on some
headphones and listening to some calm music with your eyes closed.

Try not to think about *anything*. Clear your mind! The easiest way to do this
is to focus on your breathing. Close your eyes, sit still, and take slow, deep
breaths. In your mind, think the following two words to yourself as you breathe:
in and out, in and out.

If another thought pops into your mind: "I don't have time for this! I've got to
email that customer!", just remember what you're doing, and refocus on
breathing. If you can manage to do this for about 15 minues, not only will you
feel a lot more relaxed, but more importantly, you'll feel *calm*.

All those stresses yelling in your head will now only be whispering. You'll be
the one in charge again. Instead of being a slave to your tasks, you'll be the
master.

I find that working in a calm state is far more productive. I think clearer,
feel happier, write better, and build better things. Maybe you will too.

**NOTE**: If you've never heard of [mindfulness meditation][], what I've
described above is more-or-less a form of it. You may enjoy [this book][] on the
topic (highly recommended).

 

#### Tags

personaldevelopment

#### 368 views and 1 response

-   Feb 10 2013, 12:18 PM
    katy lavallee responded:
    I can't do this without thoughts about being super bored popping into my
    head, which makes me feel anxious. However, if I'm doing yoga poses it helps
    because it gives my brain a little more of a challenge... keeping my body
    properly aligned.

  [Previous]: ../../../posts/2013/02/heroku-dynos-in-depth.html
  [Index]: ../../../index.html
  [Next]: ../../../posts/2013/02/your-actions-define-you.html
  []: ../../../image/2013/02/47184593-meditation.jpg
  [mindfulness meditation]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mindfulness
    "Mindfulness"
  [this book]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0807012394/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0807012394&linkCode=as2&tag=rdegges-20
    "Mindfulness Meditation"
