% Silence
%
%

Silence
=======

![Silence](http://getfile6.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-06-04/oJejcapFpdjetHmjbDgEggeImjasvJAhtjvFBtohCaqlnxgveodbpapqBxyq/silence.jpg.scaled696.jpg)

I live on the internet.

I work here, I play here, I communicate here. I have good times, I have
bad times. I've been both successful, and unsuccessful here. I love my
home--

But sometimes--my home is too loud. Twitter, Facebook, Hacker News,
Reddit, startups, business, work, fun, blogs, coding, books, events,
music, TV shows, movies, conversations... I enjoy them all; but each
takes a toll.

 

I build things.

My primary joy in life is creating new things. I love the rush I get
when something I've spent time envisioning, building and
finally--releasing, is able to escape from its cage for the first time.

Out of all the feelings I've experienced, creation is the one I cherish
most. It gives me a sense of purpose, power, and happiness that I find
unparalleled.

 

But sometimes, building things can be difficult.

 

Problems arise.

It's easy to get frustrated when you're doing things you've never before
done.

Sometimes you have to study, read, and hack your way out of your
problems. Sometimes you have to fight, destroy, and suppress your
problems. Somtimes, however, for the most difficult challenges, you just
need silence.

 

I've always found silence comforting. With no noise, no distractions,
and no influences--you're able to do something quite amazing: converse
with yourself.

When I'm having a difficult time solving problems, or figuring things
out--silence is my secret weapon. In almost every tough situation I've
gotten myself into over the years, silence has been an enormous part of
the solution.

I find that when I'm completely alone, I'm able to easily reflect on my
problems. Everything seems clear. Even the most difficult decisions
become simple, and all the complexities seem to melt away into nothing.

 

In all of my most trying situations, I've always found a great deal of
clarity in silence. As someone who works at home, and relies completely
on self motivators to 

 

 

 

Creating things can be tough. It can take all your mental, physical, and
even spiritual energy to push through barriers, solve your problems, and
come out victorious.

 

 

 

As I spend almost all of my time online, I'm constantly barraged with
information. And while I thoroughly enjoy the information I consume--it
has made me value silence more than any piece of information ever could.

 

Despite my ambitions, I find myself worn out. I push myself, day after
day, to become a better person. I set ambitious goals, I push myself
mentally and physically, I consciously analyze my actions, and I look
for ways to improve. I talk with my friends and family about personal
development, and constantly look for motivators around me.

Although these things are a pillar of my existence, all things I base my
life around--working on them day after day is exhausting. I know that
these things are *supposed* to be difficult, but the toll they take is 

 

 

Sometimes, however, I feel that the simple truth to all my struggles is
that I can't step away. It's hard to disengage from what you love. It's
difficult to leave your home, and do something completely different.

It is hard to be alone with yourself. To listen to your thoughts. To
take the time to analyze yourself without third party intervention...

The truth is, silence is scary.

Of all the enemies I have, I'm afraid of myself the most.

 

 

Sometimes, however, I feel that I've missed the answer all together.

Silence is powerful.

As I sit here writing this article, I'm enjoying one of the most 

 

I've always loved silence. 

 

 

One of the things I've always held close to my heart is silence.

In silence I 

 

Something I've come to cherish, living with the immense freedoms I do,
is silence.

 

There are few moments in my life more inspirational, thoughtful, and
tranquil as those I've accrued in absolute silence.

 

All too often, I find myself drowning in noise: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
