% Dogs Are Great Programming Companions
%
%

Dogs Are Great Programming Companions
=====================================

![Hello-yes-this-is-dog](http://getfile2.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-01-09/HijrvlgdnHcpCHmxGBqeAEjsftkvahdFbCIBcBabbEeexeypzfIrmFqqGdfy/hello-yes-this-is-dog.png.scaled696.png)

I love dogs. Really. They're the best beasts on the planet.

For those of you who don't know: I work at home with my chihuaha,
Scribbles. She's an awesome programming companion. As I work she lays in
her dog bed next to my desk, and naps while I code. When I stand up and
move around, she chases me around the house, and gets me to take her
outside for a walk.

Since I started working at home two years ago, I've realized how great a
dog can really be while you work. For me, Scribbles keeps me balanced.
When I'm feeling stressed, I can lean down and scratch her head. If I've
been sitting too long, Scribbles will get my attention and demand a
walk. She always knows exactly what to do to keep me sane, day after
day.

When I'm working on particularly complex software problems, I'll often
talk out loud to her, explaining my thinking and proposed solution. Half
the time, just the act of forcing myself to talk to her, explaining
myself, helps me realize problems in my thinking.

In addition to the benefits of having a funny looking animal around at
all times: knowing you've got some unconditional love no more than 2
feet away is a nice reminder life is good. Even when I'm working really
hard to fix critical problems, or in the zone coding away, having a dog
nearby makes me feel comfortable and happy.

Here are some pictures of Scribbles (the destroyer of worlds), in all
her glory:

![Scrib1](./images/93158383-1-scrib1.jpg.scaled696.jpg)
![Scrib2](http://getfile8.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-01-09/dtvAzusIlijJDFGfkExFhjgpnwAHtmencCczwvdDmEzqjIprvtdhdjaAflfp/scrib2.jpg.scaled696.jpg)
[![Scrib3](http://getfile6.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-01-09/dasjpmcxujfirsdGiyxEqndFhptqshiuFzBoxyAwAmprGlxIAdAvcfmrlnfl/scrib3.jpg.scaled696.jpg)](./images/93158383-3-scrib3.jpg.scaled1000.jpg)
![Scrib4](http://getfile6.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-01-09/ichAwFdsdcGeiEczEBCJGECCcGkJFlFCiGpIHtygmcdsscsefAlpwCGqGnay/scrib4.jpg.scaled696.jpg)
![Scrib6](http://getfile4.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-01-09/BBuijBCCHcfBIqCddAgzDBrAHqqEjsxDerywIzqArJijFtikGfvAquHqJozj/scrib6.jpg.scaled696.jpg)
![Scrib7](http://getfile7.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-01-09/adCyEydvAncjeBuwGEFcBdnEFjpvyIgwJlBuGcuIlHzsDjybproxwqlkJugw/scrib7.jpg.scaled696.jpg)
![Scrib5](http://getfile7.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-01-09/EwFiJqHdABuyGtCHoDtlvssitzzmDrtqlljvlxilatnogBJCjsFgtBblakhe/scrib5.jpg.scaled696.jpg)
![Scrib8](http://getfile9.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-01-09/JutDqjqmDcvChFxjEavGAIEeEHncgmiqbzfCxmBkhrpcGBdseJvpGoffyIus/scrib8.jpg.scaled696.jpg)
[![Scrib9](http://getfile0.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-01-09/fnJimocEssciummshjhzcEzAwlahGhkgkCliJGJBHrFiitzfskhemtDCbEBt/scrib9.jpg.scaled696.jpg)](./images/93158383-9-scrib9.jpg.scaled1000.jpg)
[![Scrib10](http://getfile5.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-01-09/HvEhmnpetevElpsACcmFBzfHqtydCDIckIybsskvIqGnBrdGvCoCsCryxaBd/scrib10.jpg.scaled696.jpg)](./images/93158383-10-scrib10.jpg.scaled1000.jpg)
[![Scrib11](http://getfile7.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-01-09/vhpjguDxAEhGDhEilEBbmzklyuIJtspxsDFAIdvlgzydxyyhdggjHAiclGlc/scrib11.jpg.scaled696.jpg)](./images/93158383-11-scrib11.jpg.scaled1000.jpg)

[See the full gallery on
Posterous](http://rdegges.com/dogs-are-great-programming-companions)

**NOTE**: Incase you're wondering--she's named Scribbles because she has
scribbled markings all over her coat.
