% My Heroku Book is Finished
%
%

My Heroku Book is Finished
==========================

[![The-heroku-hackers-guide-cover](http://getfile4.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-09-09/BnbhuynBcFkbmjhJFkGiChloHewxJIvpCadjqaeAswAiseBdtEsBIwgwoHkn/the-heroku-hackers-guide-cover.png.scaled696.png)](./images/159909373-0-the-heroku-hackers-guide-cover.png.scaled1000.png)

I wrote [a
book](http://www.theherokuhackersguide.com/ "The Heroku Hacker's Guide")
on Heroku! It's called **The Heroku Hacker's Guide**, and you can buy it
(right now!) in both e-book (PDF) and paperback formats on the new book
website: [http://www.theherokuhackersguide.com/](http://www.theherokuhackersguide.com/).

If you've read my blog, you know I tend to talk a lot about web
applications, infrastructure, and best practices. My real passion as a
developer (and startup guy) has always been building things. I love
creating new products, services, and APIs. I love working on open source
code. And I *really* love deploying my code to simple platforms that
encourage me to write good code, and allow me to grow my applications as
I please.

Since first using [Heroku](http://www.heroku.com/ "Heroku"), I've been
incredibly impressed over and over again by their product, service, and
culture. Not only has it been incredibly simple and straightforward to
deploy my web applications on Heroku's platform--it has been
*enjoyable*.

Over my years working on and building web applications, I've done all
sorts of devops work. I've built continuous integration and deployment
systems. I've written [puppet](http://puppetlabs.com/ "Puppet") modules
to bootstrap software services. I've spent time writing
[Rackspace](http://www.rackspace.com/ "Rackspace") and
[EC2](http://aws.amazon.com/ "AWS") auto-provisioning scripts that boot
new servers and kickstart software configurations. I've learned how to
automatically load balance incoming HTTP requests. All in all, I've
spent thousands of hours building fail-safe web services.

But I can tell you now that the *single most effective thing* I ever did
to free up my time and let me do what I love (build things) was to start
using Heroku.

In my opinion, Heroku has gotten things right. They've built a
platform-as-a-service company that encourages [best
practices](http://www.12factor.net/ "The 12 Factor App") development,
and gives you all the tools and transparency you need to deploy amazing
software that people love. Outside their product, Heroku is filled with
amazing people doing amazing things. They actively build and release
open source software (look at their [GitHub
account](https://github.com/heroku "Heroku on GitHub")), they hire
[amazing](http://kennethreitz.com/ "Kenneth Reitz")
[people](http://craigkerstiens.com/ "Craig Kerstiens") that build
[amazing](https://github.com/ddollar/foreman "Foreman")
[things](https://github.com/kennethreitz/requests "Python Requests"),
and they genuinely care about their users.

My new book, [The Heroku Hacker's
Guide](http://www.theherokuhackersguide.com/ "The Heroku Hacker's Guide"), aims
to be a practical guide to using and *understanding* Heroku's platform,
from the ground up. Regardless of what programming language or web
frameworks you use, if you're serious about deploying your web
applications to the best platform around, and want to master your
toolset, this book is for you.

If you'd like to buy the book (or learn more about it), you can do so
here: [http://www.theherokuhackersguide.com/](http://www.theherokuhackersguide.com/).

Thanks for reading.

-Randall
