# Randall Degges

## This is an archived post This is an archived post

[Previous][]   [Index][]   [Next][]

### Absolutely Killing It

November 13 2012, 5:57 PM  by Randall Degges

![][]

Some days are better than others.

There are some days that just *rock*, and dramatically improve your life. A
couple of months ago I had one of these awesome days. It was the kind of day
where from the moment you wake up, till the moment you go to sleep at night--you
just keep on winning.

Days like this aren't just amazing, they're life altering. This is my story.

A Tiny Bit of Background

While I've been programming professionally for a few years now, I only started
working on my own companies and business this past year. Before that, I was
always working on projects for other people, with aspirations of eventually
doing my own thing.

I'm all about writing code, so ever since I can remember I thought I'd build an
awesome product, and users would gradually trickle in and make use of it. Rinse
and repeat. I'm not a very sociable person either, so I figured I'd let my code
do the talking for me, and everything would eventually work out.

If you're a programming introvert like me, this is probably not so unfamiliar.

First Company

A while back, I started working on a new company with some colleagues. My
colleagues handled all the business aspects of the project, while I took care of
the technical work.

The first few weeks I drew mockups, threw something basic online, and made a
functional prototype. I'm not a frontend developer (in any sense), so to make
things simpler, I built out the backend first, and eventually purchased a 10\$
[ThemeForest][] theme for the website.

Surprisingly, it was a big hit. While our service was extremely simple, it ended
up getting an enormous amount of attention and my email inbox started filling
up. Over the next month or so, I graudually answered over 2,000 emails
(personally) from interested users, wanting to get started right away.

I knew the product still needed a lot of work, but with all the user interest, I
was extremely motivated.

Grinding

Over the next month, I spent a ton of time furiously working on the product.

Rewrote the backend to be faster, more stable, and more scalable than before. I
added in support for paid accounts, and got a professional designer to help
redesign the UI.

After a ton of work, the product was starting to look awesome. It had a new
look, a new feel, a new backend, and a lot more love and care.

The only thing left to do was get out there and talk with people.

 

#### Tags

programming, philosophy

#### 5 views and 0 responses

  [Previous]: ../../../posts/2012/11/a-year-in-bakersfield.html
  [Index]: ../../../index.html
  [Next]: ../../../posts/2012/11/ambitions.html
  []: ../../../image/2012/11/45775427-tiger.jpg
  [ThemeForest]: http://themeforest.net/ "ThemeForest"
