# Randall Degges

## This is an archived post This is an archived post

[Index][]   [Next][]

### Automation as Motivation

May 21 2012, 9:55 AM  by Randall Degges

![][]

For the past two weeks, I've been having some serious programming motivation
issues. Despite the fact that I know what's causing the motivation issues, I
haven't been able to propel myself out of this mini-slump like I normally do.

Last night I was chatting with a good friend and business partner about the
issue, when my friend started discussing a new business he's been working on.
While I'm unable to quote his exact words here (due to lack of certain memory),
at some point he said something along the lines of "What I really want to do is
quickly build everything, get it to a workable state, then let it just run
itself."

Instantly, the motivation returned.

For as long as I can remember, I've had a very specific idea of perfection.
Perfection in my mind is complete automation. When I build software, I do so
with the intention that when I'm done working on it, it should be able to run
and manage itself indefinitely, without any human intervention.

The real beauty of software, in my mind, is that it can last forever.

Imagine a world where every problem was solved by some sort of software or
hardware solution. Now, imagine if each of these small, independent solutions
were engineered in such a way that they required no human intervention, and
could simply carry on working indefinitely.

How awesome would that be?

The very idea that something can be solved "forever" seems extremely seductive
to me. What if I never had to do laundry again because there was a sustainable,
everlasting solution to that issue? What if I never had to implement a user
profile on a website because there was some global service which permanently
solved the problem?

Regardless of how small (or large) a problem is, there should be one simple
solution that solves it indefinitely.

Since I got off the phone with my friend, I've been absolutely consumed by the
idea of fully automating some of the projects I've been working on. I find that
over time as I work on things, I end up burying myself in the little
details--and forget about the big picture and goals. It is so easy to get
carried away with feature X, or ticket Y that you completely lose sight of your
ambitions.

Next time I fall into a slump, I'm going to remember my overall goal of perfect
automation, and get back to work.

#### Tags

programming, philosophy

#### 2368 views and 2 responses

-   May 22 2012, 5:16 AM
    sh responded:
    I have the same motivation issues right now. I get stuck into too many
    details too often, and now I ran into magic bugs. Currently bumping my head
    against the wall. \
    However, your posts are always inspiring. I read it and get this urge to DO
    stuff. So, thanks :)
-   May 22 2012, 5:38 AM
    gits1225 (Twitter) responded:
    Sometimes doing things by hand also has its beauty. For example, yesterday
    evening I was organizing my music collection; I could have hacked up a
    script and be done with it. But, just because I felt so, I started doing it
    by hand. I found out I'd forgotten what some of the artists sounded like, so
    I started giving 'em all a listen. Rediscovered some great music, and a nice
    calm starry night.

  [Index]: ../../../index-3.html
  [Next]: ../../../posts/2012/04/never-stop-hacking.html
  []: ../../../image/2012/05/41241574-battle-robot.jpg
