# Randall Degges

## This is an archived post This is an archived post

[Previous][]   [Index][]   [Next][]

### Merciless

February 26 2012, 2:07 PM  by Randall Degges

![][]

I've been working on myself a lot the past few years. I've been trying to become
stronger, faster, smarter, more honest, and better (overall). The process of
becoming these things is hard work; it takes years of dedication, patience, and
discipline--at least, that's what they tell you.

I've lived my entire life (up till now) being told that moderation is important,
and even critical to success. Despite this, I can't help but shake the feeling
that somewhere, deep inside, there's a loud, booming voice telling me to do
things all the way, with complete and absolute dedication. The voice tells me
that regardless of whether I'm working out, writing software, writing articles
(as I am now), or even working on my marriage and friendships--that I should
push myself to my limits (and beyond) to make what I'm currently working on
successful.

This voice tells me that there is no middle ground--there is only [absolute
victory][], or absolute failure. It tells me that no matter what the
consequence, whether it be fatigue, injury, or even death--that I ***must*** do
it. Live with pain, or live with regret.

For the longest time I've talked with my wife about my struggle with personal
development. Everyday I question with the approach I take. While consistency is
important, I always feel inadequate with my progress, and feel that I should be
pushing harder, running faster, and sprinting to the finish line.

Through the years, I've read so many books on personal development, minimalism,
and life hacks that I can't help but see all their themes blended together. More
than anything, the theme to these books is one of moderation: build up habits
slowly, one at a time, and if you stick with it over the years, you'll
eventually become more and more like the person you're trying to become.

While I understand the idea that moderation is important, and quite possibly the
best method for most people to make life changes--I'm tired of fighting my
nature. I'm tired of making myself live by rules that I can't personally follow
with complete dedication. I'm tired of forcing myself to slow down and live a
way that I don't fulfilling.

For the remainder of this year, I'm going to try something completely different.
I'm going to let go of all my fears, worries, and previous knowledge--and I'm
going to live the way that voice tells me to. I'm going to *live **mercilessly*.

Instead of worrying about myself, I'm going to push myself as hard as I can. I'm
going to exercise harder, eat healthier, work with more focus, and build the
projects I feel like building on my spare time.

Instead of taking my time to do things, so I don't overexert myself, I'm going
to do things as fast as I feel they should be done. This means no more
procrastination. No more self pity. 

Instead of constantly trying to live comfortably and without stress, I'm going
to make sure I don't feel comfortable. I'm going to work on the most bold and
adventurous projects possible, and ensure that I'm constantly pushing myself
beyond my means. I want to make sure that regardless of my current disposition,
I'm constantly growing, learning, and living to the fullest.

-   Execute fear.
-   Abolish doubt.
-   Eradicate anxiety.
-   Slay pity.
-   Ravage concern.
-   Obliterate moderation.

Deep down, I feel that I can no longer live the way I've been living. The voice
won't let me. To feel like I'm *living on purpose*, I need to dramatically
change my lifestyle, and more importantly, my thinking.

So here goes nothing.

Into the darkness we go.

#### Tags

personaldevelopment

#### 3316 views and 5 responses

-   Feb 26 2012, 2:23 PM

    Daniel Reeves responded:

    Big words, buddy, but where does the rubber meet the road? Or whatever
    macho-sounding metaphor I'm looking for!

    Ok, but seriously, this sounds like the perfect prelude to "OK, so it's time
    to go nuclear on my ass and start beeminding some of this shit".

    In other words, I'd love to hear your thoughts on using tools like StickK or
    Beeminder to turn this kind of resolve -- which you'll probably admit often
    amounts to a flash in the pan -- into a genuine commitment.

    Danny of, surprise surprise, Beeminder.com

-   Feb 26 2012, 2:38 PM

    Randall Degges responded:

    @Daniel Reeves, I love beeminder and other tools like that which help you
    track your progress in various areas. I still use HabitForge quite a bit in
    my day-to-day life to build habits.

    I'm definitely not advocating that people not track their progress--that can
    be hugely motivating over long periods of time.

    This is more of a mental thing for me. I feel like I've been not pushing
    myself hard enough for some time now. I got so wrapped up in continuously
    becoming successful at things that matter to me that I ended up
    marginalizing my own efforts by not consistently pushing myself hard enough,
    and being satisfied with mediocre performance increases over long periods of
    time.

    Using beeminder would certainly be a good way to turn absolute resolve into
    trackable progress. I can only assume that looking at a graph of your
    workout performance over the past month, and seeing a slope of y=x\^2 would
    be insanely motivating.

    For the record: I'm going to continue tracking my progress over time (how
    else can you really judge progress if you can't enumerate your success?),
    but instead of becoming a slave to my tracking tools, I'm going to make them
    \_\_my\_\_ slave.

-   Feb 27 2012, 9:03 AM
    Shrutarshi Basu responded:
    I'm so glad someone actually came out and said what I've been thinking. The
    idea of balance has always sounded very nice and I'm sure it works for some
    people. But personally, a lot of times I'll feel like I need to throw
    caution to the winds and just go full force. In fact, I find that striving
    to achieve balance can often turn into the idea that hard work is somehow
    bad and something to be avoided, while I'm often happiest when I'm working
    flat out and living mercilessly as you put it. I'm looking forward to
    hearing how this whole thing works out for you.
-   Mar 1 2012, 6:56 AM

    Aditya Raj Bhatt responded:

    I think you have been reading books of Ayn Rand. \
    If not you should read the following written by her:\
    Fountainhead\
    Atlas Shrugged

    These will reinforce your belief in absolute victory and even give you
    justifications on why choosing a middle ground is not acceptable. \
    On the whole happy realisation and wish that you succeed in whatever goal
    you choose to set for yourself.

-   Mar 2 2012, 9:40 AM
    Peter Koopman responded:
    You have put my thoughts into words. Someone once said to me 'Moderation in
    everything, including moderation'. I think it's time to moderate the
    moderation in my life!

  [Previous]: ../../../posts/2012/03/writing-habit-thoughts-continued.html
  [Index]: ../../../index-3.html
  [Next]: ../../../posts/2012/02/how-i-learned-to-program.html
  []: ../../../image/2012/02/38062438-berserk.jpg
  [absolute victory]: http://rdegges.com/absolute-victory "Absolute Victory"
