% What's Up With the 'File' Menu?
%
%

What's Up With the 'File' Menu?
===============================

I’m no usability expert. In fact, I’ve been called tasteless by many
people (my wife included), but what the hell is up with *pretty much*
all programs having a ‘File’ menu?

[http://dictionary.reference.com/](http://dictionary.reference.com/)
defines ‘file’ as:

> 1.  a folder, cabinet, or other container in which papers, letters,
>     etc., are arranged in convenient order for storage or reference.
> 2.  a collection of papers, records, etc., arranged in convenient
>     order: *to make a file for a new account*.
> 3.  *Computers*. a collection of related data or program records
>     stored on some input/output or auxiliary storage medium: *This
>     program’s main purpose is to update the customer master file*.
> 4.  a line of persons or things arranged one behind another
>     (distinguished from rank).
> 5.  Military. a. a person in front of or behind another in a military
>     formation. b. one step on a promotion list.
> 6.  one of the vertical lines of squares on a chessboard.
> 7.  a list or roll.
> 8.  a string or wire on which papers are strung for preservation and
>     reference.

If you’re still awake, then I’m sure you get the point—no where in the
definition of the word ‘file’ do you see “a bunch of totally random
computer software menu options”.

So—why does almost every program have a ‘File’ menu?

I can understand having a ‘File’ or ‘Files’ menu option if your program
performs file-based operations (eg: Microsoft Office, Open Office), but
for almost every other program out there, having a ‘File’ menu stuffed
with stupid options that have nothing to do with files (eg: ‘Quit’, ‘New
Window’, ‘New Tab’, ‘Work Offline’, etc.) seems ridiculous.

Make it Intuitive
-----------------

A big part of the reason so many people can barely use a computer is
because most user interfaces still aren’t intuitive. What’s more
deceptive to new users than menu options located in random places?

I’ve been using computers since I can remember, and I still have
problems using new software today, mainly because the options I’m
looking for are located in nonsensical menu locations. Not only is it
frustrating and time consuming, but it makes users not want to use your
software.

If you had never used a computer before, and were introduced to Firefox
for the first time, wouldn’t it make more sense to find window
management options under a ‘Windows’ menu? Or printing options under a
‘Printing’ menu?

If you’re a developer—whether you build desktop apps, mobile apps, or
webapps: **make your user interfaces make sense**. Not only will your
users appreciate it, but most of all, *I will*.
