# Randall Degges

## This is an archived post This is an archived post

[Previous][]   [Index][]   [Next][]

### How to Reset Your Sleep Schedule, Seriously

September 4 2010, 11:44 PM  by Randall Degges

Every now and then on [Hacker News][], I see a new discussion about resetting
your sleep schedule. Resetting your sleep schedule is the process of shifting
your *awake* hours from night to day.

I'm a night person. I go to bed late, and wake up late. However, for many night
owls like myself, this can cause a lot of problems. Often you're required to be
awake for work early in the morning (9 to 5, anyone?), and most of the
businesses you need to use daily (grocery stores, barber shops, etc.) operate
only during the day.

So, the question of course, is how can you reset your sleep schedule easily
without any pain? Numerous web sites would have you believe that your sleep
cycle can be ‘hacked', by doing some particular ritual.

[Wisebread][] suggests that if you don't eat for roughly 12 to 16 hours before
you want to wake up, your body will automatically adjust to a new schedule
without any work.

[Gigaom][] says that you should just start doing it. Force yourself to wake up
at the desired time each day, and you'll get used to it quickly.

There are a million websites (google says there are \~7,570,000) with different
suggestions for hacking your sleep cycle.

## Why Most Sleep Hacks Don't Work

Most sleep hacks don't work because they require a lot of hard work and
willpower. I can tell you from lots of experience, that after going to bed at
4AM, waking up at 6AM is **not** trivial (and it's even harder to stay awake
until 10PM the following night!).

If you have the dedication and willpower to follow through with the sort of
punishment that most sleep hacks require, then more power to you. But for most
people, that is not a viable option.

Instead of trying to ‘hack' your sleep, I recommend a more simple, natural
approach:

## Go Camping

Camping is a great way to help reset your sleep schedule.

First of all, it's fun (you can do it over a weekend). An important part of
adjusting something major (like your sleep cycle) is to make it enjoyable. If
you're a night owl trying to get into a 9 to 5 schedule, then you might as well
do something that will not just ‘get you through the day' (eg: caffine
overdose), but will actually make you feel *normal* during those hours.

Secondly, camping is cheap and natural. You don't need to starve yourself, you
don't need to take any drugs, and you don't need to spend a lot of money talking
to your physician about your sleep woes.

Thirdly, after you come back from your short camping trip, you'll not easily
fall back into your old schedule. You'd be surprised how easily the human body
can adjust to natural day / night cycles, and how long those effects can last.

## How it Works

The way that camping helps align your sleep cycle with day / night rotation, is
simple—it exposes you to the elements.

When you spend most of your time inside your house (apartment, office, etc.),
you are separated from most natural elements. This includes (among other
things): sunlight, night (darkness), temperature, and sound.

While camping, you're exposed to sunlight as soon as the sun rises. Where I live
in California, the sun typically comes up around 6AM. An hour or two of sunlight
in your eyes, shining through your tent, will naturally make waking up easier.

At night time, whereas you'd usually be awake very late, you'll find that when
out camping, there isn't all that much to do. Besides the lack of light, without
a constant stream of things to keep you busy (computers, movies, etc.), you'll
feel much more relaxed, and will begin feeling tired a lot sooner than you would
otherwise.

Sound has an equally important role. When camping, you're surrounded by nature.
Depending on where you are, you may hear birds chirping in the morning, crickets
singing at night, and owls hooting. For me, anyhow, these sounds help me both
fall asleep easily, as well as wake up when the animals start making noise.

And don't forget the impact that temperature has. At night, when the temperature
drops, you won't feel comfortable until you're snuggled into a sleeping bag to
keep warm. When the sun comes up in the morning and you start to roast in your
sleeping back, your body will quickly adjust and help you out of bed.

## My Experiment

My wife and I just got back from a short three day camping trip with some of my
wife's family and friends. Last weekend we left Friday for [San Simeon][] state
park in California, and got back to our apartment in Los Angeles late Sunday
afternoon.

I've been a night owl as long as I can remember, usually falling asleep around 3
or 4AM, and waking up at 10AM or so depending on my daily responsibilities. So,
one goal of this trip was to document my sleep schedule, and see whether or not
it is possible to reset one's internal clock over a 3 day 2 night trip.

### Friday

I wake up at 10AM, and hop into the shower. About 45 minutes later my wife and I
are on the road heading to the campgrounds (a 4.5 hour drive).

After arriving at the campsite, and feeling a bit tired from the long drive, my
wife and I setup our tent quickly, dump off our clothes and items, then drive to
the nearest town to get some food and supplies.

When we come back, sunset is fast approaching, so we decide to walk to the beach
(just a few steps away from our campground), and walk along the coast as the sun
sets.

We get back to camp, start a fire, and sit around chatting with one another for
approximately two hours.

It's dark, we're tired, so we decide to go to bed. It's around 9PM, and it feels
like it's 2AM. It's probably 50F outside, and with the cold weather it feels
especially good to be in a warm sleeping bag :)

### Saturday

The sun comes up early, probably 6 or 7AM, and I hear birds chirping loudly
outside of the tent. I try to stay in bed for a little while, and manage to go
for about an hour longer before I'm way too hot in my sleeping back, and jump
out of bed. I feel relaxed, and not tired at all. I haven't woken up at 8AM
willfully in a long time.

My wife and I spend most of the day hanging around the campsite, but take a
short trip to the nearby town and walk up and down their main street to see all
the little shops.

When we get back to the campsite, we all sit around the campfire talking and
eating chili. Around 10PM, my wife and I feel tired again, so we go back to the
tent and play some cards before falling asleep.

It was extremely easy to fall asleep. The cold weather outside made my sleeping
bag feel all the more comfortable, and I just drifted off in several minutes.

### Sunday

I wake up a bit before 8AM, listening to birds chirping and feeling the sun on
my face. Feels good. I feel rested. We pack up the campsite, and drive back
home.

After getting home and catching up on emails, I start feeling tired again, and
doze off at 11PM with no problems.

### This Entire Week

So far, I've been going to bed at around 11PM, and waking up at 8AM every day
this week, with no issues. I feel great. I haven't had any problems going to bed
or waking up early.

## What Will You Do?

While some of the sleep hacks you'll read about online may seem more convenient
than going camping for a weekend, I'd highly recommend camping to anyone who is
serious about adjusting their schedule.

In addition to resetting your sleep schedule, you'll also get out of the house
for a bit, and hopefully de-stress yourself for a couple days.

What do you think?

#### Tags

life

#### 52071 views and 4 responses

-   Sep 5 2010, 10:01 PM
    mictro (Twitter) responded:
    Good Post! So True.
-   Sep 5 2010, 10:19 PM

    developerpanda (Twitter) responded:

    Must confess didn't have the patience to read the post, the "how i did it
    part". Don't want to underestimate your efforts but changing your sleep part
    is seriously not that hard.

    I have been a late-night person for several years now. I did this recently.

    Just decided to sleep early & wake up early next day.

    That did it. And by early i meant 'normal' time when other normal people
    sleep/wake up ;)

-   Sep 5 2010, 11:45 PM

    chrismorrison (Twitter) responded:

    Re: developerpanda, telling folks who have trouble changing their sleep
    schedule to "just do it" approaches the fatuousness of giving the same
    advice to someone who is bad in social situations, or needs to lose weight,
    or has trouble with details, or needs to be more successful in their
    business ... etc. Please don't go through life assuming that everyone is
    living \*your\* experience.

    For myself, I can't just decide to go to sleep early; I'll lie there awake
    for hours until my brain decides it's OK to sleep (there's no forcing the
    issue, and Ambien and its cousins don't do much for me). But reading this
    article reminded me that camping has helped change my schedule in the past.
    So, thanks, Randall.

-   Sep 6 2010, 4:01 AM

    DebtSucksBlog (Twitter) responded:

    I agree with chrismorrison, much as I try to go to sleep a few hours early,
    it just doesn't work. I end up laying there in bed for hours, generally
    until my usual sleeping time. Wasted time and wasted effort (if you can call
    laying in bed for a few hours effort).

    Funny thing is, I did this a couple months ago, though not intentionally. I
    took a motorcycle camping trip up the east coast for a week (starting in
    south central PA, getting as far as Vermont) and I very quickly fell in to a
    sleep schedule most would call "normal." I generally stay up til 6am and
    wake up around 230pm, as I start work at 330 and the shift could be anywhere
    from 6-13 hours (one of those "work until the work is done" jobs). I took a
    quick nap before I left home at 6am for a 6 hour ride to a gathering, and
    napped for an hour or two in the evening while I was there. After that,
    daylight and temperature instantly took over. Can't ride at night because of
    the cold, can't find a campsite on the AT at night due to the... dark...
    combined with the reasons stated above by the OP. First night camping
    (second night on the road) I actually went to bed around 10 and woke up
    around 4 because I was freezing my ass off (didn't bring a blanket!).

    Fortunately, it's much easier to reverse the process when your work schedule
    demands being a night owl, as staying up later is a hell of a lot easier
    than going to bed sooner.

  [Previous]: ../../../posts/2010/09/why-dont-you-use-virtualenvwrapper.html
  [Index]: ../../../index-6.html
  [Next]: ../../../posts/2010/08/asterisk-git-mirrors.html
  [Hacker News]: http://news.ycombinator.com/
  [Wisebread]: http://www.wisebread.com/how-to-naturally-reset-your-sleep-cycle-overnight/
  [Gigaom]: http://gigaom.com/collaboration/how-to-reset-your-body-clock/
  [San Simeon]: http://www.parks.ca.gov/?page_id=590
